The use and development of tools – increasingly complicated ones – was and is essential to Homo sapiens’ survival, right from our beginnings onwards. From retouched flake tools in the Middle Palaeolithic industry to the sophisticated bone, antler and ivory tools - including sewing needles and spear throwers - of the Late Palaeolithic through to agricultural tools with the transition to agriculture from around 9000 years ago, modern humans became ever more adaptable and versatile. Of course, one could argue that although we can now create complex tools such as the smartphone, we have become so glued to these screens this may come with certain side-effects.

Homo sapiens, moreover, developed from initially living mostly in natural shelters such as caves, to constructing their own huts from wood or even mammoth bones, and eventually forming settlements and cities from a whole range of materials. Modern humans would never have reached this point if not for fire, though, the more habitual use of which has been around since at least 400,000 years ago (by our ancestors). Language must be mentioned, too, because although we can barely keep our mouths shut nowadays it obviously did not start out that way. It must have developed somewhere during our hunter-gatherer existence, but the exact point proves very elusive indeed.

Art has been around for ages, too, with the most definitive and widespread evidence for actual symbolic art stemming from Europe by at least 40,000 years ago, with its magnificently painted caves such as Chauvet Cave and Lascaux Cave.

Panel of the Rhinos, Chauvet Cave (Replica)
Panel of the Rhinos, Chauvet Cave (Replica)
by Patilpv25 (CC BY-SA)

The Question of Modernity

This artistry forms part of the suite of modern features us modern humans tend to feel sets us apart from the rest of the world around us. But at which point in our evolutionary history did we become behaviourally modern humans, and what exactly does this entail?

Although a universally accepted definition is seemingly too much for our behaviourally modern brains to come up with, a key component seems to lie in our ability to communicate within a symbolically organised world and in using symbols in different social and economic contexts.

The ‘when’ question is as of yet harder to answer. This behaviour obviously did not simply pop up overnight, in groups all across the Old World, as if a universal switch had been flicked. Modernity consists of many different features that appeared gradually throughout time and space. Symbolic burials rear their heads as early as c. 115,000 years ago (Skhul Cave, Israel), with red ochre perhaps being used symbolically not long after. By 60,000 years ago most of the aspects we associate with modernity had appeared, in varying packages, among which complex tools; evidence for rituals; and complex treatment of the dead. By at least 40,000 years ago, fully modern behaviour - including figurative art; ritualistic or mythical imagery and signalling; and artefacts such as musical instruments – is visible throughout the Old World.

It used to be hip to attribute any kind of possibly symbolic prehistoric behaviour exclusively to Homo sapiens, rather than for instance the Neanderthals, who were around until c. 40,000-30,000 years ago. However, it is clear that they, too, showed at least certain aspects of modernity, and we have no way of knowing whether the Neanderthals would have eventually developed into MacBook-hugging techies or not. Homo sapiens holds the monopoly because after at the latest c. 30,000 years ago, we were the only humans left – albeit carrying small portions of DNA from other humans with us.

Related Content Books Cite This Work License
Editorial Review This article has been reviewed for accuracy, reliability and adherence to academic standards prior to publication.
